



AN INTRODUCTION TO CP/M FEATURES AND FACILITIES 


COPYRIGHT (c) 1976, 1977, 1978 
DIGITAL RESEARCH 


COPYRIGHT (c) 1979 

VECTOR GRAPHIC, INC. 


REVISION OF NOV. 15, 1979 



Copyright 


Copyright (c) 1373 by Digital Research. An rights reserved, 
No part ct this publication mav be reproduced, transmitted 
transcribed, stored in a retrieval system, or translated into 
anv language or computer language, in any form or bv anv 
means, electronic, mechanical, magnetic, optical, chemical, 
manual or otherwise, without the prior written permission at 
Digital Research, Post Office Box 379, Pacific Grove. 
California 93950. 


Disclaimer 


Digital Research makes no representations or warranties with 
respect to the contents hereof .and •specifically disclaims any 
implied 'warranties of merchantability or fitness for any parti- 
cular purpose. Further, Digital Research reserves the right 
to revise this publication and to make changes from time to 
time in the content hereof without obligation of Digital 
Research to notify any person of such revision or changes. 


Trademarks 


CP/M is a registered trademark of Digital Research. MP/M. 
MAC, and SID are trademarks of Digital Research. 



Table of Contents 


Section Paqe 

1. INTRODUCTION 1 

2. FUNCTIONAL DESCRIPTION OF CP/M 3 

2.1. General Command Structure 3 

2.2. Pile References 3 

3. SWITCHING DISKS 6 

4. THE FORM OF BUILT-IN COMMANDS 7 

4.1. ERA afn cr 7 

4.2. DIR afn cr - 8 

4.3. REN ufnl=ufn2 cr 8 

4.4. SAVE n ufn cr 9 

4.5. TYPE ufn cr 9 

5. LINE EDITING AND OUTPUT CONTROL 11 

6. TRANSIENT COMMANDS 12 

6.1. STAT cr 13 

6.2. ASM ufn cr 16 

6.3. LOAD ufn cr 17 

6.4. PIP cr 18 

6.5. ED ufn cr 25 

6.6. SYSGEN cr 27 

6.7. SUBMIT ufn parm#l ... parm#n cr 28 

6.8. DUMP ufn cr 30 

6.9. MOVCPM cr ; 30 

7. BDOS ERROR MESSAGES 33 






1. INTRODUCTION . 


CP/M is a monitor control program for microcomputer system development 
which uses IBM— compatible flexible disks for backup storage. Using a computer 
mainframe based upon Intel's 8080 microcomputer, CP/M provides a general 
environment for program construction, storage, and editing, along with 
assembly and program check-out facilities. 


The CP/M monitor provides rapid access to programs through a 
comprehensive file management package. The file subsystem supports a named 
file structure, allowing dynamic allocation of file space as well as 
sequential and randcm file access. Using this file system, a large number of 
distinct programs can be stored in both source and machine executable form. 

CP/M also s u pports a powerful context editor. Intel-compatible assembler, 
and debugger subsystems. Optional software includes a powerful 

Intel— compatible macro assembler, symbolic^ debugger, along with various 
high-level languages. When coupled with CP/M s Console Command Processor, the 
resulting facilities equal or excel similar large computer facilities. 

CP/M is logically divided into several distinct parts? 

BIOS Basic I/O System (hardware dependent) 

BDOS Basic Disk Operating System 

CCP Console Command Processor 

TPA Transient Program Area 

The BIOS provides the primitive operations necessary to access the 
diskette drives and to interface standard peripherals (teletype, CRT, Paper 
Tape Reader/Punch, and user-defined peripherals) , and can be tailored by the 
user for any particular hardware environment by “patching" this portion of 
CP/M. The BDOS provides disk management by controlling one or more disk 
drives containing independent file directories. The BDOS implements disk 
allocation strategies which provide fully dynamic file construction while 
minimizing head movement across the disk during access. Any particular file 
may contain any number of records, not exceeding the size of any single disk. 
In a standard CP/M system, each disk can contain up to 64 distinct files. The 


1 



BDOS has entry points which include the following primitive operations which 
can be programmatically accessed: 

SEARCH Look for a particular disk file by name,, 

OPEN Open a file for further operations. 

CLOSE Close a file after processing. 

RENAME Change the name of a particular file. 

READ Read a record from a particular file. 

WRITE Write a record onto the disk. 

SELECT Select a particular disk drive for further 

operations. 

The CCP provides symbolic interface between the user's console and the 
remainder of the CP/M system. The CCP reads the console device and processes 
commands which include listing the file directory , printing the contents of 
files,, and controlling the operation of transient programs, such as 
assemblers, editors, and debuggers. The standard commands which are available 
in the CCP are listed in a following section. 

The last segment of CP/M is the area called the Transient Program Area 
(TPA) . The TPA holds programs which are loaded from the disk under command of 
the CCP. Dur inc? program editing, for example, the TPA holds the CP/M text 
editor machine code and data areas. Similarly, programs created under CP/M 
can be checked out by loading and executing these programs in the TPA. 

It should be mentioned that any or all of the CP/M component subsystems 
can be "overlayed" by an executing program. That is, once a user's program is 
loaded into the TPA, the CCP, BDOS, and BIOS areas can be used as the 
program's data area. A '*bootstrap“ loader is programmatically accessible 
whenever the BIOS portion is not overlayed; thus, the user program need only 
branch to the bootstrap loader at the end of execution, and the complete CP/M 
monitor is reloaded fron disk. 

It should be reiterated that the CP/M operating system is partitioned 
into distinct nodules, including the BIOS portion which defines the hardware 
environment in which CP/M is executing. Thus, the standard system can be 
easily modified to any non-standard environment by charging the peripheral 
drivers to handle the custom system. 


2 



2. FUNCTIONAL DESCRIPTION OF CP/M. 

The user interacts with CP/M primarily through the CCP, which reads and 
interprets commands entered through the console. In general, the CCP 
addresses one of several disks which are online (the standard system addresses 
up to four different disk drives) . These disk drives are labelled A, B, C, 
and D. A disk is "logged in" if the CCP is currently addressing the disk. In 
order to clearly indicate which disk is the currently logged disk, the CCP 
always prompts the operator with the disk name followed by the symbol ">" 
indicating that the CCP is ready for another command. Upon initial start up, 
the CP/M system is brought in from disk A, and the CCP displays the message 

xxK CP/M VER m.m 

where xx is the memory size (in kilobytes) which this CP/M system manages, and 
m.m is the CP/M version number. All CP/M systems are initially set to operate 
in a 16K memory space, but can be easily reconfigured to fit any memory size 
on the host system (see the MDVCPM transient command) . Following system 
signon, CP/M automatically logs in disk A, prompts the user with the symbol 
,, A>" (indicating that CP/M is currently addressing disk "A") , and waits for a 
command. The canmands are implemented at two levels: built-in commands and 
transient canmands. 

2.1. GENERAL COMMAND STRUCTURE. 

Built-in ccmmands are a part of the CCP program itself, while transient 
canmands are loaded into the TPA from disk and executed. The built-in 
ccmmands are 

ERA Erase specified files. 

DIR List file names in the directory. 

REN Rename the specified file. 

SAVE Save memory contents in a file. 

TyPE Type the contents of a file on the logged disk. 

Nearly all of the canmands reference a particular file or group of files. The 
form of a file reference is specified below. 


2.2. FILE REFERENCES. 

A file reference identifies a particular file or group of files on a 
particular disk attached to CP/M. These file references can be either 
“unambiguous" (ufn) or "ambiguous" (afn) . to unambiguous file reference 
uniquely identifies a single file, while an ambiguous file reference may be 


3 



satisfied by a number of different files. 

File references consist of two parts? the primary name and the secondary 
name* Although the secondary name is optional, it usually is generic? that 
is, the secondary name "ASM," for example, is used to denote that the file is 
an assembly language source file, while the primary name distinguishes each 
particular source file* The two names are separated by a as shown below: 


pppppppp. sss 

where pppppppp represents the pr imary name of eight characters or less, and 
sss is the secondary name of no more than three characters. As mentioned 
above, the nane 

pppppppp 

is also allowed and is equivalent to a secondary nane consisting of three 
blanks. The characters used in specifying an unambiguous file reference 
cannot contain any of the special characters 

while all alphanumerics and remaining special characters are allowed. 

An ambiguous file reference is used for directory search and pattern 
matching. The form of an ambiguous file reference is similar to an 
unambiguous reference, except the symbol “?“ may be interspersed throughout 
the primary and secondary names. In various commands throughout CP/M, the "?" 
symbol natches any character of a file name in the "?" position. Thus, the 
ambiguous reference 


X?Z.C?M 

is satisfied by the unambiguous file names 


and 


XYZ.OOM 

X3Z.CAM 


Note that the anbiguous reference 

* * 
e 

is equivalent to the anbiguous file reference 

•s'?*? 

• ••••••••••• 


while 


4 



pppppppp.* 

and 

*.sss 

are abbreviations for 

ppp p pppp.??? 

and 

????????. sss 

respectively. As an example, 

DIR *.* 

is interpreted by the CCP as a command to list the names of all disk files in 
the directory, vhile 

DIR X.Y 

searches only for a file by the name X.Y Similarly, the command 
DIR X?Y. C?M 

causes a search for all (unambiguous) file names on the disk which satisfy 
this ambiguous reference. 

The following file names are valid unambiguous file references: 


X XYZ GAMMA 

X.Y XYZ.CDM GAMMA. 1 


As an added convenience, the programmer can generally specify the disk 
drive name along with the file name. In this case, the drive name is given as 
a letter A through Z followed by a colon (:). The specified drive is then 
"logged in" before the file operation occurs. Thus, the following are valid 
file names with disk name prefixes: 

A:X.Y B:XYZ C:GAMMA 

Z : XYZ.CDM B:X.A?M C:*.ASM 

It should also be noted that all alphabetic lower case letters in file 
and drive names are always translated to upper case when they are processed by 
the CCP. 


5 



3. SWITCHING DISKS 


The operator can switch the currently legged disk by typing the disk 
drive name "(A, B, C, or D) followed by a colon (s) when the CCP is waiting for 
console input. Thus, the sequence of prompts and commands shown below might 
occur after the CP/M system is loaded from disk A: 

16K CP/M VER 1.4 


j=V>DXR. 

ASM 

PRN 

List all files on disk A. 

SAMPLE 

SAMPLE 

A>Bs 

Switch to disk B. 




B>DIR * 

.ASM 

List all *!AS&!L files on B 

DUMP 

ASM 


FILES 

ASM 



B>As 


Switch back to A. 


4 


THE FORM CF BUILT- IN (DMMANDS 




The file and device reference forms described above can now be used to 
fully specify the structure of the built-in commands. In the description 
below, assume the following abbreviations: 


ufh 

- 

unambiguous file reference 

afo 

- 

ambiguous file reference 

cr 

- 

carriage return 


Further, recall that the CCP always translates lower case characters to upper 
case characters internally. Thus, lower case alphabetics are treated as if 
they are upper case in command names and file references. 

4.1 ERA afn cr 


The ERA (erase) command ranoves files from the currently logged- in disk 
(i.e., the disk name currently prompted by CP/M preceding the The files 

which are erased are those which satisfy the ambiguous file reference afn. 
The following examples illustrate the use of ERA: 



ERA X.Y 


ERA X.* 

ERA *.ASM 

ERA X?Y. C?M 


ERA *.* 


ERA B:*.PRN 


The file named X.Y on the currently logged disk 
is removed from the disk directory, and the space 
is returned. 

All files with primary name X are removed from 
the current disk. 

All files with secondary name ASM are removed 
from the current disk. 

All files on the current disk which satisfy the 
ambiguous reference X?Y.C?M are deleted. 

Erase all files on the current disk (in this case 
the CCP prompts the console with the message 
"ALL FILES (Y/N) ?“ 

which requires a Y response before files are 
actually removed) . 

All files on drive B which satisfy the ambiguous 
reference ????????. PRN are deleted, independently 
of the currently logged disk. 


7 



4.2. DIR afn cr 

The DIR (directory) command causes the names of all files vhich satisfy 
the ambiguous file name afn to be listed at the console device. As a special 
case, the command 

DIR 

lists the files on the currently logged disk (the command “'DIR'" is equivalent 
to the command "DIR *.*"). Valid DIR commands are shown below. 

DIR X.Y 

DIR X?Z «C?M 

DIR ??.Y 

Similar to other CCP commands, the afn can be preceded by a drive name. 
The following DIR commands cause the selected drive to be addressed before the 
directory search takes place. 

DIR Bs 

DIR B;X„Y 

DIR Bs*.A?M 

If no files can be found on the selected diskette which satisfy the 
directory request, then the message “NOT FOUND" is typed at the console. 

4.3. REN ufnl=ufn2 cr 

The REN (rename) command allows the user to change the names of files on 
disk. The file satisfying ufn2 is changed to ufnl. The currently logged disk 

is assumed to contain the file to rename (ufnl) . The CCP also allows the user 

to type a left-directed arrow instead of the equal sign, if the user's console 
supports this graphic character. Examples of the REN command are 

REN X.Y=Q.R The file Q.R is changed to X.Y. 

REN XYZ . GOM=XYZ .XXX The file XYZ.XXX is changed to XYZ.COM. 

The operator can precede either ufnl or ufn2 (or both) by an optional 
drive address. Given that ufnl is preceded by a drive name, then ufn2 is 
assumed to exist on the sane drive as ufnl. Similarly, if ufn2 is preceded by 
a drive name, then ufnl is assumed to reside on that drive as well. If both 
ufnl arri ufn2 are preceded by drive names, then the same drive must be 


8 



specified in both cases. The following REN commands illustrate this format. 

REN A:X.ASM = Y.ASM The file Y.ASM, is changed to X.ASM on 

drive A. 

REN B:ZAP.BAS=ZOT. BAS The file ZOT.BAS is changed to ZAP.BAS 

on drive B. 

REN BrA.ASM = B:A.BAK The file A. BAR is renamed to A. ASM on 

drive B. 

If the file ufiil is already present, the REN command will respond with 
the error "FILE EXISTS" and not perform the change. If ufn2 does not exist on 
the specified diskette, then the message “NOT FOUND" is printed at the 
console. 


4.4. SAVE n ufn cr 

The SAVE ccmmarri places n pages (256-byte blocks) onto disk fran the TPA 
and names this file ufn. In the CP/M distribution system, the TPA starts at 
100H (hexadecimal) , which is the second page of memory. Thus, if the user's 
program occupies the area fran 100H through 2FFH, the SAVE command must 
specify 2 pages of memory. The machine code file can be subsequently loaded 
and executed. Examples are: 

SAVE 3 X.OOM Copies 100H through 3FFH to X.OOM. 

SAVE 40 Q Copies 100H through 28FFH to Q (note 

that 28 is the page count in 28FFH, 
and that 28H = 2*16+8 = 40 decimal) . 

SAVE 4 X.Y Copies 100H through 4FFH to X.Y. 

The SAVE command can also specify a disk drive in the afn portion of the 
command, as shown below. 

SAVE 10 B : ZOT. CDM Copies 10 pages (100H through 0AFFH) to 

the file ZOT. COM on drive B. 


4.5. TYPE ufn cr 

The TYPE command displays the contents of the ASCII source file ufn on 
the currently logged disk at the console device. Valid TYPE commands are 


TYPE X.Y 


9 


TYPE X.PLM 


TYPE XXX 

The TYPE command expands tabs (clt-I characters) , assuming tab positions 
are set at every eighth column. The ufn can also reference a drive name as 
showi below. 

TYPE BsX.PRN The file X.PFN from drive B is displayed. 


10 


5. LINE EDITING PND OUTPUT CONTROL. 

The CCP allows certain line editing functions while typing command lines. 

Delete and echo the last character typed at the 
console. 

Delete the entire line typed at the console. 

(Same as ctl-U) 

Retype current command line: types a "clean line" fol- 
lowing character deletion with rubouts. 

Physical end of line: carriage is returned, but line 
is not sent until the carriage return key is depressed. 

CP/M system reboot (warm start) 

End input from the console (used in PIP and ED). 

The control functions ctl-P and ctl-S affect console output as shown below. 

ctl-P Copy all subsequent console output to the currently 

assigned list device (see the STAT command) . Output 
is sent to both the list device and the console device 
until the next ctl-P is typed. 

ctl-S Stop the console output temporarily. Program execution 

and output continue when the next character is typed 
at the console (e.g., another ctl-S). This feature is 
used to stop output on high speed consoles, such as 
CRT's, in order to view a segment of output before con- 
tinuing . 


rubout 

ctl-U 

ctl-X 

ctl-R 

ctl-E 

ctl-C 

ctl-Z 


Note that the ctl-key sequences shown above are obtained by depressing the 
control and letter keys simultaneously. Further, CCP command lines can 
generally be up to 255 characters in length; they are not acted upon until the 
carriage return key is typed. 


11 



4 


6. TRANSIENT COMMANDS. 

Transient commands are loaded from the currently logged disk and executed 
in the TPA. The transient commands defined for execution under the CCP are 
shown below. Additional functions can easily be defined by the user (see the 
LOAD command definition) . 

STAT List the number of bytes of storage remaining on the 

currently logged disk, provide statistical information 
about particular files, and display or alter device 
assignment. 

ASM Load the CP/M assembler and assemble the specified 

program from disk. 

LCAD Load the file in Intel "hex 1 " machine code format and 

produce a file in machine executable form which can be 
loaded into the TPA (this loaded program becomes a 
new command under the CCP) . 

' DDT Load the CP/M debugger into TPA and start execution. 

PIP Load the Peripheral Interchange Program for subsequent 

disk file and peripheral transfer operations. 

ED Load and execute the CP/M text editor program. 

SYSGEN Create a new CP/M system diskette. 

SUBMIT Submit a file of commands for batch processing. 

DUMP Dump the contents of a file in hex. 

MDVCPM Regenerate the CP/M system for a particular memory 

size. 



Transient commands are specified in the same manner as built-in commands, and 
additional commands can be easily defined by the user. As an added 
convenience, the transient command can be preceded by a drive name, which 
causes the transient to be loaded from the specified drive into the TPA for 
execution. Thus, the command 

B:STAT 

causes CP/M to temporarily "log in" drive B for the source of the STAT 
transient, and then return to the original logged disk for subsequent 
processing. 




12 



The basic transient commands are listed in detail below. 

6.1. STAT cr 

The STAT command provides general statistical information about file 
storage and device assignment. It is initiated by typing one of the following 
forms: 


STAT cr 

STAT "ccmmand line" cr 

Special forms of the "command line" allow the current device assignment to be 
examined and altered as well. The various ccmmand lines which can be 
specified are shown below, with an explanation of each form shown to the 
right. 


STAT cr If the user types an empty ccmmand line, the STAT 

transient calculates the storage remaining on all 
active drives, and prints a message 

x: R/W, SPACE: nnnK 
or 

x: R/0, SPACE: nnnK 

for each active drive x, where RAJ indicates the 
drive may be read or written, and R/O indicates 
the drive is read only (a drive becomes R/0 by 
explicitly setting it to read only, as shown 
below, or by inadvertantly changing diskettes 
without performing a warm start) . The space 
__ remaining on the diskette in drive x is given 

in kilobytes by nnn. 

STAT x: cr If a drive name is given, then the drive is 

selected before the storage is computed. Thus, 
the command "STAT B:" could be issued while 
logged into drive A, resulting in the message 

BYTES REMAINING ON B: nnnK 

STAT afn cr The ccmmand line can also specify a set of files 

to be scanned by STAT. The files which satisfy 
afii are listed in alphabetical order, with stor- 
age requirements for each file under the heading 

RECS BYTS EX D: FILENAME. TOP 

rrrr bbbK ee d:ppp p pppp.sss 

where rrrr is the number of 128-byte records 


13 



allocated to the file, bbb is the number of kilo- 
bytes allocated to the file (bbb=rrrr*128/1024) , 
ee is the number of 16K extensions (ee=bbb/16) , 
d is the drive name containing the file (A...Z) , 
pppppppp is the (up to) eight-character primary 
file name, and sss is the (up to) three-character 
secondary name. After listing the individual 
files, the storage usage is summarized. 


STAT x:afn cr As a convenience, the drive name can be given 

ahead of the afn. In this case, the specified 
drive is first selected, and the form “STAT afn“ 
is executed. 

STAT x : =R/0 cr This form sets the drive given by x to read-only, 

which remains in effect until the next warm or 
cold start takes place. When a disk is read-only, 
the message 

BDQS ERR ON x: READ ONLY 

will appear if there is an attempt to write to 
the read-only disk x. CP/M waits until a key 
is depressed before performing an automatic warm 
start (at which time the disk becomes R/W) . 


The STAT command also allows control over the physical to logical device 
assignment (see the IOBYTE function described in the manual “CP/M Interface 
Guide".) In general, there are four 

logical peripheral devices which are, at any particular instant, each assigned 
to one of several physical peripheral devices. The four logical devices are 
named; 

CON; The system console device (used by CCP 

for communication with the operator) 

RDR; The paper tape reader device 

PUN; The paper tape punch device 

LST: The output list device 


The actual devices attached to any particular computer system are driven 
by subroutines in the BIOS portion of CP/M. Thus, the logical RDR; device, 
for example, could actually be a high speed reader. Teletype reader, or 
cassette tape. In order to allow some flexibility in device naming and 
assignment, several physical devices are defined, as shown below; 


14 



TTY: 


CRT: 


BAT: 


UC1: 

PTR: 

UR1: 

UR2: 

FTP: 

UP1: 

UP2: 

LPT: 

UU: 


Teletype device (slow speed console) 

Cathode ray tube device (high speed console) 

Batch processing (console is current RDR: , 
output goes to current LST: device) 

User-defined console 

Paper tape reader (high speed reader) 

User-defined reader #1 

User-defined reader #2 

Paper tape punch (high speed punch) 

User-defined punch #1 

User-defined punch #2 

Line printer 

User-defined list device #1 


It must be emphasized that the physical device names may or may not 
actually correspond to devices which the names imply. That is, the PTP: 
device may be implemented as a cassette write operation, if the user wishes. 
The exact correspondence and driving subroutine is defined in the BIOS portion 
of CP/M. 


The possible logical to physical device assignments can be displayed by 
typing 

STAT VAL: cr 

The STAT prints the possible values which can be taken on for each logical 
device: 


CON: = TTY: 

CRT: 

BAT: 

UC1: 

RDR: = TTY: 

PTR: 

UR1: 

UR2: 

PUN: = TTY: 

PTP: 

UP1: 

UP2: 

LST: = TTY: 

CRT: 

LPT: 

UU: 


In each case, the logical device shown to the left can take any of the four 
physical assignments shown to the right on each line. The current logical to 
physical mapping is displayed by typing the command 

STAT DEV: cr 


15 



which produces a listing of each logical device to the left, and the current 
corresponding physical device to the right. For example, the list might 
appear as follows: 


00N: - CRT: 

HDRs = UR1: 

PON: = FTP: 

LET: » TT¥s 

The current logical to physical device assignment can be changed by typing a 
STAT command of the form 

STAT ldl = pdl, ld2 ■ pd2 , , ldn - pdn cr 

where ldl through ldn are logical device nanes, and pdl through pdn are 
compatible physical device names (i.e. , Idi and cdi appear on the same line in 
the "VAL:" command shown above). The following are valid STAT commands which 
change the current logical to physical device assignments: 

STAT CDNs^CKE: cr 

STAT FtJN: = THz ,LST:=LPT: , EDR:=TTy: cr 


6.2. AS4 urn cr 


The ASM command loads and executes the CP/M 8030 assembler. The ufn 
specifies a source file containing asssnbly language statements where the 
secondary nane is assumed to be ASM, and thus is not specified. The following 
ASM commands are valid: 

ASM X 

ASM GAMMA 

The two-pass assembler is automatically executed. If asssnbly errors occur 
during the second pass, the errors are printed at the console. 

The assembler produces a file 


X.FRN 


where x is the primary name specified in the ASM command. The PEN file 
contains a listing of the source program (with Imbedded tab characters if 
present in the source program) , along with the machine code generated for each 
statement and diagnostic error messaaes, if any. The PEN file can be listed 


16 


at the console using the TYPE command, or sent to a peripheral device using 
PIP (see the PIP command structure below). Note also that the PRN file 
contains the original source program, augmented by miscellaneous assembly 
information in the leftmost 16 columns (program addresses and hexadecimal 
machine code, for example). Thus, the PRN file can serve as a backup for the 
original source file: if the source file is accidently removed or destroyed, 
the PRN file can be edited (see the ED operator's guide) by removing the 
leftmost 16 characters of each line (this can be done by issuing a single 
editor "macro" command) . The resulting file is identical to the original 
source file and can be renamed (REN) from PRN to ASM for subsequent editing 
and assembly. The file 

x.HEX 

is also produced which contains 8080 machine language in Intel "hex" format 
suitable for subsequent loading and execution (see the LOAD command) . For 
complete details of CP/M's assembly language program, see the "ZSM for CP/M 
Z-80 Assembler User's Guide." 

Similar to other transient commands, the source file for assembly can be 
taken from an alternate disk by prefixing the assembly language file name by a 
disk drive name. Thus, the command 

ASM B: ALPHA cr 

loads the assembler from the currently logged drive and operates upon the 
source program ALPHA.ASM on drive B. The HEX and PRN files are also placed on 
drive B in this case. 


6.3. LOAD ufn cr 

The LOAD command reads the file ufn, which is assumed to contain "hex" 
format machine code, and produces a memory image file which can be 
subsequently executed. The file name ufn is assumed to be of the form 


x.HEX 

and thus only the name x need be specified in the command. The LOAD command 
creates a file named 

x.COM 

which marks it as containing machine executable code. The file is actually 
loaded into memory and executed when the user types the file name x 
immediately after the prompting character “>" printed by the CCP, 

In general, the CCP reads the name x following the prompting character 
and looks for a built-in function name. If no function name is found, the CCP 
searches the system disk directory for a file by the name 


17 



x.GOM 


If found, the machine code is loaded into the TP A, and the program executes. 
Thus, the user need only LOAD a hex file once? it can be subsequently 
executed any number of times by simply typing the primary name. In this way, 
the user can "invent" new ccmmands in the CCP. (Initialized disks contain the 
transient ccmmands as COM files, which can be deleted at the user s option.) 
The operation can take place on an alternate drive if the file name is 
prefixed by a drive name. Thus, 


LOAD BrBETA 


brings the LOAD program into the TPA from the currently logged disk and 
operates upon drive B after execution begins. 


It must be noted that the BETA. HEX file must contain valid Intel format 
hexadecimal machine code records (as produced by the ASM program, for example) 
which begin at 100H, the beginning of the TPA. Further, the addresses in the 
hex records must be in ascending order; qaps in unfilled memory regions are 
filled with zeroes by the LOAD command as the hex records are read. Thus, 
LOAD must be used only for creating CP/M standard "COM" files which operate in 
the TPA. Programs which occupy regions of memory other than the TPA can be 
loaded under DDT. ■ . . • , .y / 


6.4. PIP cr 


('; fr. A 


PIP is the CP/M Peripheral Interchange Program which implements the basic 
media conversion operations necessary to load, print, punch, copy, and combine 
disk files. The PIP program is initiated by typing one of the following forms 


(1) PIP cr 

(2) PIP "command line" cr 

In both cases, PIP is loaded into the TPA and executed. In case (1) , PIP 
reads command lines directly from the console, prompted with the 
character, until an empty command line is typed (i.e. , a single carriage 

return is issued by the operator) . Each successive command line causes some 

media conversion to take place according to the rules shown below. Form (2) 

of the PIP command is equivalent to the first, except that the single command 
line given with the PIP command is automatically executed, and PIP terminates 
immediately with no further prompting of the console for input command lines. 
The form of each command line is 


destination = source#l, source#2, ... , source#n cr 
where "destination" is the file or peripheral device to receive the data, and 


18 






I 


“source#l, . .., sourcefn" represents a series of one or more files or devices 
which are copied from left to right to the destination. 

When multiple files are given in the command line (i.e, n > 1) , the 
individual files are assumed to contain ASCII characters, with an assumed CP/M 
end-of-file character (ctl-Z) at the end of each file (see the 0 parameter to 
override this assumption) . The equal symbol (=) can tie replaced by a 
left-oriented arrow, if your console supports this ASCII character, to improve 
readability. Lower case ASCII alphabetics are internally translated to upper 
case to be consistent with CP/M file and device name conventions. Finally, 
the total command line length cannot exceed 255 characters (ctl-E can be used 
to force a physical carriage return for lines which exceed the console width) . 

The destination and source elements can be unambiguous references to CP/M 
source files, with or without a preceding disk drive name. That is, any file 
can be referenced with a preceding drive name (A:, B:, C:, or D:) which 
defines the particular drive where the file may be obtained or stored. When 
the drive name is not included, the currently logged disk is assumed. 
Further, the destination file can also appear as one or more of the source 
files, in which case the source file is not altered until the entire 
concatenation is complete. If the destination file already exists, it is 
removed if the command line is properly formed (it is not removed if an error 
condition arises) . The following command lines (with explanations to the 
right) are valid as incut to PIP: 


X = Y cr 


X = Y,Z cr 


X.ASM=Y.ASM,Z.ASM,FIN.ASM cr 


NEW.ZOT = B SOLD. ZAP cr 


Copy to file X from file Y, 
where X and Y are unambiguous 
file names; Y remains unchanged. 

Concatenate files Y and Z and 
copy to file X, with Y and Z 
unchanged. 

Create the file X.ASM from the 
concatenation of the Y, Z, and 
FIN files with type ASM. 

Move a copy of OLD. ZAP from drive 
B to the currently logged disk; 
name the file NEW.ZOT. 


BsA.U = BsE.V,A:C.W,D.X cr Concatenate file B.V from drive B 

with C.W from drive A and D.X. 
from the logged disk; create 
the file A.U on drive B. 



For to re convenient use, PIP allows abbreviated commands for transferring 
files between disk drives. The abbreviated forms are 


19 



PIP x:=afn cr 


PIP x:=y:afn cr 
PIP ufn = y: cr 
PIP x:ufn = y: cr 

The first form copies all files from the currently looped disk which satisfy 
the a£n to the same file names on drive x (x = A...Z) . The second form is 
eaui valent to the first, where the source for the copy is drive y (y = A**. 
Z) . The third form is equivalent to the command "PIP ufn=ysufn cr“ which 
copies the file given by ufn from drive y to the file ufn on drive x. The 
fourth form is equivalent to the third, where the source disk is explicitly 
given by y. 

Note that the source and destination disks must be different in all of 
these cases. If an afn is specified, PIP lists each ufn which satisfies the 
afn as it is being copied. If a file exists by the sane name as the 
destination file, it is removed ucon successful completion of the copy, and 
replaced by the copied file. 

The following PIP commands give examples of valid disk-to-disk copy 
operations : 

Copy all files which have the 
secondary name "’COM* 11 to drive B 
from the current drive. 

Copy all files which have the 
primary name "ZAP" to drive A 
fron drive B. 

Eaui valent to ZAP ,ASM=B : ZAP .ASM 
Equivalent to 8:Z0T.C0M=A:Z0T.O3M 
Same as B: GAMMA. BAS=GAMMA. BAS 
Same as B: GAMMA, BAS=A: GAMMA. BAS 

PIP also allows reference to Dhysical and logical devices which are 
attached to the CP/M system. The device names are the same as given under the 
STAT command, along with a number of specially named devices. The logical 
devices qiven in the STAT command are 

CON: (console) , EDR: (reader) , PUN: (punch) , and LST: (list) 

while the physical devices are 


Bs=*.CDM cr 

A:=B:ZAP.* cr 

ZAP.ASM=B: cr 
B:ZGT.Q3M=A: cr 
B:=GAMMA.BAS cr 
B:=A:GAMMA.BAS cr 


23 



TTY: (console, reader, punch, or list) 

CRT: (console, or list) , UC1: (console) 

PTR: (reader) , UR1: (reader) , UR2: (reader) 

FTP: (punch) , UP1: (punch) , UP2: (punch) 

LPT: (list) , UL1: (list) 

(Note that the "BAT:" physical device is not included, since this assignment 
is used only to indicate that the RDR: and LST: devices are to be used for 
console input/output.) 

The FDR, 1ST, PUN, and CON devices are all defined within the BIOS 
portion of CP/M, and thus are easily altered for any particular I/O system. 
(The current physical device mapping is defined by IOBYTE; see the "CP/M 
Interface Guide" for a discussion of this function) . The destination device 
must be capable of receiving data (i.e., data cannot be sent to the punch), 
and the source devices must be capable of qeneratinq data (i.e., the LST: 
device cannot be read) . 

The additional device names which can be used in PIP commands are 

NUL: Send 40 "nulls" (ASCII 0's) to the device 

(this can be issued at the end of punched output) . 

EOF: Send a CP/M end-of-file (ASCII ctl-Z) to the 

destination device (sent automatically at the 
end of all ASCII data transfers through PIP) . 

INP: Special PIP input source which can be "patched" 

into the PIP program itself: PIP qets the input 
data character-by-character by CALLina location 
103H, with data returned in location 109H (parity 
bit must be zero) . 

OUT: Special PIP output destination which can be 

patched into the PIP program: PIP CALLS location 
106H with data in register C for each character 
to transmit. Note that locations 109H throuqh 
1FFH of the PIP memory image are not used and 
can be replaced by special purpose drivers using 
DDT (see the DDT operator's manual). 

PRN: Same as LST: , except that tabs are expanded at 

every eighth character position, lines are 
numbered , and page ejects are inserted every 60 
lines, with an initial eject (same as [tSnp] ) . 

File and device names can be interspersed in the PIP commands. In each 
case, the specific device is read until end-of-file (ctl-Z for ASCII files, 
and a real end of file for non-ASCII disk files) . Data from each device or 
file is concatenated from left to right until the last data source has been 


21 



read. The destination device or file is written using the data from the 
source files,, and an end-of-file character (ctl-Z) is appended to the result 
for ASCII files. Note if the destination is a disk file, then a temporary 
file is created ($$$ secondary name) which is chanqed to the actual file name 
only upon successful completion of the copy. Files with the extension "COM” 
are always assumed to be non-ASCII. 


The copy operation can be aborted at any time by depressing any key on 
the keyboard* (a rubout suffices) . PIP will respond with the message "ABORTED" 
to indicate that the operation was not completed. Note that if any operation 
is aborted, or if an error occurs during processing, PIP removes any pending 
commands which were set up while using the SUBMIT command. 


It should also be noted that PIP performs a special function if the 
destination is a disk file with type "HEX” (an Intel hex formatted machine 
code file) , and the source is an external peripheral device, such as a paper 
tape reader. In this case, the PIP program checks to ensure that the source 
file contains a properly formed hex file, with legal hexadecimal values and 
checksum records. When an invalid input record is found, PIP reports an error 
message at the console and waits for corrective action. It is usually 
sufficient to open the reader and rerun a section of the tape (pull the tape 
back about 20 inches). When the tape is ready for the re-read, type a single 
carriage return at the console, and PIP will attempt another read. If the 
tape position cannot be properly read, simply continue the read (by tyoing a 
return following the error message) , and enter the record manually with the ED 
program after the disk file is constructed. For convenience, PIP allows the 
end-of-file to be entered from the console if the source file is a FDR: 
device. In this case, the PIP program reads the device and monitors the 
keyboard. If ctl-Z is typed at the keyboard, then the read operation is 
terminated normally. 


Valid PIP corunands are shown below. 
PIP 1ST: = X.PRN cr 

PIP cr 

*CDN: =X.ASM , Y.ASM ,Z .ASM cr 
*X.HEX=CON: ,Y.HEX,PTR: cr 

*cr 


Cbpy X.PRN to the 1ST device and 
terminate the PIP program. 

Start PIP for a sequence of 
canmands (PIP prompts with "*") . 

Concatenate three ASM files and 
copy to the CON device. 

Create a HEX file by reading the 
CDN (until a ctl-Z is typed) , fol- 
lowed by data from Y.HEX, followed 
by data from PTR until a ctl-Z is 
encountered. 

Single carriage return stops PIP. 


22 


PIP PUN:=NUL: ,X.ASM,EOF: ,NUL: cr 


Send 40 nulls to the punch device; 
then copy the X.ASM file to the 
punch, followed by an end-of-file 
(ctl-Z) and 40 more null charac- 
ters. 

The user can also specify one or more PIP parameters, enclosed in left 
and right square brackets, separated by zero or more blanks. Each parameter 
affects the copy operation, and the enclosed list of parameters must 
immediately follow the affected file or device. Generally, each parameter can 
be followed by an optional decimal integer value (the S and 0 parameters are 
exceptions) . The valid PIP parameters are listed below. 

B Block mode transfer: data is buffered by PIP until an ASCII 

x-off character (ctl-S) is received from the source device. 
This allows transfer of data to a disk file from a continuous 
reading device, such as a cassette reader. Upon receipt of 
the x-off, PIP clears the disk buffers and returns for more 
inout data. The amount of data which can be buffered is de- 
pendent upon the memory size of the host system (PIP will 
issue an error message if the buffers overflow) . 

Dn Delete characters which extend past column n in the transfer 
of data to the destination from the character source. This 
parameter is used most often to truncate long lines which are 
sent to a (narrow) printer or console device. 

E Echo all transfer operations to the console as they are being 
performed. 

F Filter form feeds from the file. All imbedded form feeds are 
removed. The P parameter can be used simultaneously to 
insert new form feeds. 

H Hex data transfer: all data is checked for proper Intel hex 
file format. Non-essential characters between hex records 
are removed during the copy operation. The console will be 
prompted for corrective action in case errors occur. 

I Ignore ":00" records in the transfer of Intel hex format 

file (the I parameter automatically sets the H parameter) . 

L Translate upper case alphabetics to lower case. 

N Add line numbers to each line transferred to the destination 

starting at one, and incrementing by 1. Leading zeroes are 
suppressed, and the number is followed by a colon. If N2 
is specified, then leading zeroes are included, and a tab is 
inserted following the number. The tab is expanded if T is 


23 


set. 


0 Object file (non-ASCII) transfer; the normal CP/M end of 
file is ignored. 

Pn Include page ejects at every n lines (with an initial page 
eject). If n = 1 or is excluded altogether, page ejects 
occur every 60 lines. If the F parameter is used, form feed 
suppression takes place before the new page ejects are 
inserted. 

Qs*z Quit copying from the source device or file when the 
string s (terminated by ctl-Z) is encountered. 

Ss f z Start copying frcm the source device when the string s is 
encountered (terminated by ctl-Z) . The S and Q parameters 
can be used to •■abstract" a particular section of a file 
(such as a subroutine) . The start and guit strings are al- 
ways included in the copy operation. 

NOTE - the strings following the s and g parameters are 
translated to upper case by the CCP if form (2) of the 
PIP command is used. Form (1) of the PIP invocation, how- 
ever, does not perform the automatic upper case translation. 

(1) PIP cr 

(2) PIP "command line" cr 

Tn Expand tabs (ctl-I characters) to every nth column during the 
transfer of characters to the destination from the source. 

U Translate lower case alphabetics to upper case during the 

the copy operation. 

V Verify that data has been copied correctly by rereading 

after the write operation (the destination must be a disk 
file) . 

Z Zero the parity bit on input for each ASCII character. 


The following are valid PIP commands which specify parameters in the file 
transfer: 

PIP X.ASM=B: [v] cr Copy X.ASM from drive B to the current drive 

and verify that the data was properly copied. 

PIP LPT :=X. ASM [nt8u] cr Copy X.ASM to the LPT: device; number each 

line, expand tabs to every eighth column, and 
translate lower case alphabetics to upper 
case. 


24 


PIP PUN:=X.HEX[il ,Y.ZOT[h] cr First copy X.HEX to the PUN: device and 

ignore the trailing “ :00“ record in X.HEX; 
then continue the transfer of data by reading 
Y.ZOT, which contains hex records, including 
any ":00" records which it contains. 

PIP X.LIB = Y.ASM [ sSUBRl: f z qJMP L3 T z ] cr Copy from the file Y.ASM 

into the file X.LIB. Start the copy when the 
string "SUBR1:" has been found, and quit copy- 
ing after the string “JMP L3" is encountered. 


PIP PRN:=X.ASM [p50] Send X.ASM to the LST: device, with line num- 

bers, tabs expanded to every eighth column, 
and page ejects at every 50th line. Note that 
nt8p60 is the assumed parameter list for a PEN 
file; p50 overrides the default value. 


6.5. ED ufn cr 

The ED program is the CP/M system context editor, which allows creation 
and alteration of ASCII files in the CP/M environment. Complete details of 
operation are given the ED user's manual, "ED: a Context Editor for the CP/M 
Disk System." In general, ED allows the operator to create and operate upon 
source files vfoich are organized as a sequence of ASCII characters, separated 
by end-of-line characters (a carriage-return line- feed sequence) . There is no 
practical restriction on line length (no single line can exceed the size of 
the working memory) , which is instead defined by the number of characters 
typed between cr's. The ED program has a number of commands for character 
string searching, replacement, and insertion, which are useful in the creation 
and correction of programs or text files under CP/M. Although the CP/M has a 
limited memory work space area (approximately 5000 characters in a 16K CP/M 
system) , the file size which can be edited is not limited, since data is 
easily "paged" through this work area. 

Upon initiation, ED creates the specified source file, if it does not 
exist, and opens the file for access. The programmer then "appends" data from 
the source file into- the work area, if the source file already exists (see the 
A command) , for editinq. The appended data can then be displayed, altered, 
and written from the work area back to the disk (see the W command) . 
Particular points in the program can be automatically paged and located by 
context (see the N command) , allowing easy access to particular portions of a 
large file. 

Given that the operator has typed 
ED X.ASM cr 


25 



the ED program creates an intermediate work file with the name 

X.$$$ 

to hold the edited data during the ED run. Upon completion of ED, the X.ASM 
file (original file) is renamed to X.BAK, and the edited work file is renamed 
to X.ASM. Thus, the X.BAK file contains the original (unedited) file, and the 
X.ASM file contains the newly edited file. The operator can always return to 
the previous version of a file by removing the most recent version, and 
renaming the previous version. Suppose, for example, that the current X.ASM 
file was improperly edited; the sequence of CCP command shown below would 
reclaim the backup file. 

DIR X.* Check to see that BAK file 

is available. 

ERA, X.ASM Erase most recent version. 

REN X.ASM=X.BAK Rename the BAK file to ASM. 


\ 



< 


i 


i 




Note that the operator can abort the edit at any point (reboot, power failure, 
ctl-C, or Q command) without destroying the original file. In this case, the 
BAK file is not created, and the original file is always intact. 

The ED program also allows the user to “ping-ponq" the source and create 
backup files between two disks. The form of the ED command in this case is 

ED ufn ds 

where ufh is the nane of a file to edit on the currently logged disk, and d is 
the name of an alternate drive. The ED program reads and processes the source 
file, and writes the new file to drive d, using the name ufe. Upon completion 
of processing, the original file becomes the backup file. Thus, if the 
operator is addressing disk A, the following command is valid: 

ED X.ASM B: 

which edits the file X.ASM on drive A, creatina the new file X.$$$ on drive 
B. Upon completion of a successful edit, A:X.ASM is renamed to A: X.BAK, and 
B:X.$$$ is renamed to BsX.ASM. For user convenience, the currently logged 
disk becomes drive B at the end of the edit. Note that if a file by the name 
B : X.ASM exists before the editing begins, the message 

FILE EXISTS 

is printed at the console as a precaution against accidently destroying a 
source file. In this case, the operator must first ERAse the existing file 
and then restart the edit operation. 




26 


Similar to other transient commands, editing can take place on a drive 
different from the currently logged disk by preceding the source file name by 
a drive nane. Examples of valid edit requests are shown below 

ED A:X.ASM Edit the file X.ASM on drive A, with 

new file and backup on drive A. 

ED B:X.ASM A: Edit the file X.ASM on drive B to the 

temporary file X.$S$ on drive A. On 
termination of editing, change X.ASM 
on drive B to X.BAK, and change X.$$S 
on drive A to X.ASM. 


6.6. SYSGEN cr 

The SYSGEN transient command allows generation of an initialized diskette 
containing the CP/M operating system. The SYSGEN program prompts the console 
for commands, with interaction as shown below. 

SYSGEN cr Initiate the SYSGEN program. 

SYSGEN VERSION m.m SYSGEN sign-on messaqe. 

SOURCE DRIVE NAME (OR RETURN TO SKIP) 

Respond with the drive name (one 
of the letters A, B, C, or D) of 
the disk containing a CP/M sys- 
tem; usually A. If a copy of 
CP/M already exists in memory, 
due to a MOVCPM command, type a 
cr only. Typing, a drive name 
x will cause the response: 

SOURCE ON x THEN TYPE RETURN Place a diskette containing the 

CP/M operating system on drive 
x (x is one of A, B, C, or D) . 
Answer with cr when ready. 

FUNCTION COMPLETE System is copied to memory. 

SYSGEN will then prompt with: 

DESTINATION DRIVE NAME (OR RETURN TO REBOOT) 

If a diskette is being ini- 
tialized, place the new disk 
into a drive and answer with 
the drive name. Otherwise, type 
a cr and the system will reboot 
from drive A. Typing drive name 
x will cause SYSGEN to prompt 


27 



with; 


DESTINATION ON x THEN TYPE RETURN Place new diskette into drive 

x; type return when ready. 

FUNCTION COMPLETE New diskette is initialized 

in drive x. 

The "DESTINATION" prompt will be repeated until a single carriage return is 
typed at the console, so that more than one disk can be initialized. 


Upon completion of a successful system generation, the new diskette 
contains the operating system, and only the built-in commands are available. 
A factory-fresh IBM-ccmpatible diskette appears to CP/M as a diskette with an 
empty directory; therefore, the operator must copy the appropriate COM files 
from an existing CP/M diskette to the newly constructed diskette using the PIP 
transient. 

The user can copy all files from an existing diskette by typing the PIP 
command 


PIP B: = A; *.*[v] cr 

which copies all files from disk drive A to disk drive B, and verifies that 
each file has been copied correctly. The name of each file is displayed at 
the console as the copy operation proceeds. 

It should be noted that a SYSGEN does not destroy the files which already 
exist on a diskette; it results only in construction of a new operating 
system. Further, if a diskette is being used only on drives B through D, and 
will never be the source of a bootstrap operation on drive A, the SYSGEN need 
not take place. In fact, a new diskette needs absolutely no initialization to 
be used with CP/M. 


6.7. SUBMIT ufn parmfl ... carman cr 

The SUBMIT command allows CP/M commands to be batched together for 
automatic processing. The ufn given in the SUBMIT command must be the 
filename of a file which exists on the currently logged disk, with an assumed 
file type of “SUB." The SUB file contains CP/M prototype commands, with 
possible parameter substitution. The actual parameters parm#l ... parmln are 
substituted into the prototype commands, and, if no errors occur, the file of 
substituted commands are processed sequentially by CP/M. 


28 


The prototype command file is created using the ED program, with 

interspersed "$" parameters of the form 

$1 $2 $3 ... $n 

corresponding to the number of actual parameters which will be included when 

the file is submitted for execution. When the SUBMIT transient is executed, 
the actual parameters parmtl ... parm#n are paired with the formal parameters 
$1 ... $n in the prototype commands. If the number of formal and actual 
parameters does not correspond, then the submit function is aborted with an 
error message at the console. The SUBMIT function creates a file of 
substituted commands with the name 

$$$.SUB 

on the logged disk. When the system reboots (at the termination of the 

SUBMIT) , this command file is read by the CCP as a source of input, rather 
than the console. If the SUBMIT function is performed on any disk other than 
drive A, the commands are not processed until the disk is inserted into drive 
A and the system reboots. Further, the user can abort command processing at 
any time by typina a rubout when the command is read and echoed. In this 
case, the $5$. SUB file is removed, and the subsequent commands come from the 
console. Command processing is also aborted if the CCP detects an error in 
any of the commands. Proqrams which execute under CP/M can abort processing of 
command files when error conditions occur by simply erasing any existing 
$$$.SUB file. 

In order to introduce dollar signs into a SUBMIT file, the user may type 
a which reduces to a single "$*' within the command file. Further, an 

up-arrow symbol may precede an alphabetic character x, which produces a 
single ctl-x character within the file. 

The last caranand in a SUB file can initiate another SUB file, thus 
allowing chained batch commands. 

Suppose the file ASMBL.-SUB exists on disk and contains the prototype 
commands 

ASM $1 
DIR $1.* 

ERA *.BAK 
PIP $2:=$1.PRN 
ERA Sl.PPN 

and the command 

SUBMIT ASMBL X PRN or 

is issued by the operator. The SUBMIT program reads the ASMBL. SUB file, 
substituting "X" for all occurrences of $1 and "PRN'* for all occurrences of 
$2, resulting in a $$$.SUB file containing the commands 


29 



A®! X 

om x.* 

ERA *.BAK 
PIP PRN;=X.PRN 
ERA X.PRN 

which are executed in sequence by the CCP. 

The SUBMIT function can access a SUB file which is on an alternate drive 
by preceding the file name by a drive name. Submitted files are only acted 
upon, however, when they appear on drive A. Thus, it is possible to create a 
submitted file on drive B which is executed at a later time when it is 
inserted in drive A. 


6.8. DUMP ufn cr 

The DUMP program types the contents of the disk file (ufn) at the console 
in hexadecimal form. The file contents are listed sixteen bytes at a time, 
with the absolute byte address listed to the left of each line in 
hexadecimal. Long typeouts can be aborted by pushing the rubout key during 
printout. (The source listing of the DUMP program is given in the "CP/M 
Interface Guide" as an example of a program written for the CP/M environment.) 


6.9. MQVCPM cr 

The MQVCPM program allows the user to reconfigure the CP/M system for any 
particular memory size. Two optional parameters may be used to indicate (1) 
the desired size of the new system and (2) the disposition of the new system 
at program termination. If the first parameter is emitted or a is given, 
the MQVCPM program will reconfigure the system to its maximum size, based upon 
the kilobytes of contiguous RAM in the host system (starting aat 0000H) . If 
the second parameter is emitted, the system is executed, but not permanently 
recorded; if is given, the system is left in memory, ready for a SYSGEN 

operation. The MQVCPM program relocates a memory image of CP/M and places 
this image in memory in preparation for a system generation operation. The 
command forms are; 

MQVCPM cr Relocate and execute CP/M for manage- 

ment of the current memory configura- 
tion (memory is examined for contigu- 
ous RAM, starting at 100H) . Upon com- 
pletion of the relocation, the new 
system is executed but not permanently 
recorded on the diskette. 


30 



MOVCPM n cr 


Create a relocated CP/M system for 
management of an n kilobyte system (n 
must be in the range 16 to 64) , and 
execute the system, as described above. 

MOVCPM * * cr Construct a relocated memory image for 

the current memory configuration, but 
leave the memory image in memory, in 
preparation for a SYSGEN operation. 

MOVCPM n * cr Construct a relocated memory image for 

an n kilobyte memory system, and leave 
the memory image in preparation for a 
SYSGEN operation. 


The command 

MOVCPM * * 

for example, constructs a new version of the CP/M system and leaves it in 
memory, ready for a SYSGEN operation. The message 

READY FOR "SYSGEN” OR 
"SAVE 32 CPMxx.COM” 

is printed at the console upon completion, where xx is the current memory size 
in kilobytes. The operator can then type 

SYSGEN cr Start the system generation. 

SOURCE ERIVE NAME (OR RETURN TO SKIP) Respond with a cr to skip 

the CP/M read operation since the system 
is already in memory as a result of the 
previous MOVCPM operation. 

DESTINATION ERIVE NAME (OR RETURN T0 REBOOT) 

Respond with B to write new system 
to the diskette in drive B. SYSGEN 
will prompt with: 

DESTINATION ON B, THEN TYPE RETURN 

Ready the fresh diskette on drive 
B and type a return when ready. 

Note that if you respond with "A" rather than "B" above, the system will be 
written to drive A rather than B. SYSGEN will continue to type the prompt: 

DESTINATION ERIVE NAME (OR RETURN TO REBOOT) 

until the operator responds with a single carriage return, which stops the 


31 



SYSGEN program with a system reboot. 

The user can then go through the reboot process with the old or new 
diskette. Instead of performing the SYSGEN operation, the user could have 
typed . 

SAVE 32 CPMxx.CDM 

at the completion of the MOVCPM function, which would place the CP/M memory 
image on the currently logged disk in a form which can be “patched." This is 
necessary when operating in a non-standard environment vfaere the BIOS must be 
altered for a particular peripheral device configuration. 


Valid MOVCPM commands are given below: 


MOVCPM 48 cr 


Construct a 48K verskon of CP/M and start 
execution. 


MOVCPM 48 * cr 


MOVCPM * * cr 


Construct a 48K version of CP/M in prepara- 
tion for permanent recording: response is 

READY FOR "SYSGEN" OR 
"SAVE 32CPM48.COM" 

Construct a maximum memory version of CP/M' 
and start execution. 


It is important to note that the newly created system is serialized with 
the number, attached to the original diskette and is subject to the conditions 
of the Digital Research Software Licensing Agreement. 


32 



7. BDOS ERROR MESSAGES. 

There are three error situations which the Basic Disk Operating System 
intercepts during file processsing. When one of these conditions is detected, 
the BDOS prints the message: 

BDOS ERR CN x: error 

where x is the drive name, and "error" is one of the three error messages: 

BAD SECTOR 
SELECT 
READ ONLY 

The "BAD SECTOR" message indicates that the disk controller electronics 
has detected an error condition in reading or writing the diskette. This 
condition is generally due to a malfunctioning disk controller, or an 
extremely worn diskette.. If you find that your system reports this error more 
than once a month, you should check the state of your controller electronics, 
and the condition of your media. 


In any case; recovery from this condition is accomplished by 
typing a ctl-C to reboot (this is the safest!) , or a return, which simply 
ignores the bad sector in the file operation. Note, however, that typing a 
return may destroy your diskette integrity if the operation is a directory 
write, so make sure you have adequate backups in this case. 

The “SELECT" error occurs when there is an attempt to address a drive 
beyond the A through D range. In this case, the value of x in the error 
message gives the selected drive. The system reboots following any input from 
the console. 

The “READ ONLY" message occurs when there is an attempt to write to a 
diskette which has been designated as read-only in a STAT command, or has been 
set to read-only by the BDOS. In general, the operator should reboot C?/M 
either by using the* warm start procedure (ctl-C) or by performing a cold start 
whenever the diskettes are changed. If a changed diskette is to be read but 
not written, BDOS allows the diskette to be chanced without the warm or cold 
start, but internally marks the drive as read-only. The status of the drive 
is subsequently changed to read/write if a warm or cold start occurs. Upon 
issuing t±is message, G?/M waits for input from the console. An automatic 
warm start takes place following any input. 


33 





